order: 8

The Washington State Constitution places a firm limit on the amount of debt service the State can pay on certain forms of debt.  Beginning in 1889, the State had a fixed debt limit of $400,000. In 1972, this was replaced with a limit on annual debt service (payments of principal and interest) which sets the maximum annual debt service (MADS) in relation to a historical average of the State’s general state revenues.  More specifically, the Constitution requires that maximum annual payments of debt subject to this limit not exceed a specified percentage (currently 8.50 percent, declining to 8.00 percent effective fiscal year 2035) of the average general state revenues for the six preceding fiscal years. Debt service on nearly all VPGO debt is subject to the constitutional limit.

Under the Constitution, general state revenues include all state money received in the State treasury, with the exception of:  (1) fees and revenues derived from the operation of any undertaking, facility, or project; (2) moneys received as gifts, grants, donations, aid, or assistance when the terms require the application of such moneys otherwise than for general purposes of the State; (3) retirement system moneys and performance bonds and deposits; (4) trust fund moneys, including moneys received from taxes levied for specific purposes; and (5) proceeds from sale of bonds or other indebtedness.

Linking the State’s debt capacity to the State’s revenue growth is intended to support sound financial management and ensure that debt service payments do not strain Washington’s ability to provide other services to its residents. However, as capital needs tend to grow with the economy, challenges arise when the pace of state revenue growth does not keep up with economic growth. In fact, general fund revenues now account for a smaller share of Washington total personal income down from 7 percent in the mid-1990’s to less than 4.5 percent in recent years. Looking forward, the Economic and Revenue Forecast Council projects that personal income will increase at an average rate of 4.9 percent over the next several decades while general fund revenues grow by only 4.2 percent. This differential is likely to hinder the State’s capacity to finance needed infrastructure investments.

## figure 14 needs more information to be renderd

The Legislature, OFM and the Office of the State Treasurer have developed a model to estimate debt capacity and to assess the affordability of bonds subject to the Constitutional debt limit.  The debt model is used both for long term debt planning and as an “early warning” mechanism during times of decreasing revenues. It estimates debt service and debt capacity over a 30-year period as a function of the Constitutional debt limit, projected general state revenues and future interest rates. The model also assumes a fixed growth rate for biennial bond authorizations and that bonds authorized for each biennium are issued over a four year period using 25-year, level debt service bond structures.  Projections are reviewed at least quarterly and both revenue and interest rate assumptions are aligned with those of the Economic and Revenue Forecast Council over the forecast horizon.

The model determines the maximum bond authorization as the dollar amount that causes projected future MADS to equal the specified percentage of projected average general state revenues, given the assumed growth in general state revenues and in future biennial bond authorizations and the resultant future bond issuance.  To the extent the maximum bond authorization for the current biennium is increased, future projected maximum bond authorizations are decreased to keep MADS below the limits and vice versa.  Thus, the model provides regularly updated measures of current and projected future debt capacity governed primarily by projected growth in general state revenues.
