order: 9

# EXEMPTIONS FROM THE CONSTITUTIONAL DEBT LIMIT

Article VIII of the Constitution excludes certain types of debt from the debt limit, most notably debt payable from motor vehicle fuel taxes, from license fees on motor vehicles and from interest on the permanent common school fund, provided that there are sufficient revenues “from such sources to pay the principal and interest due on all obligations for which said source of revenue is pledged.”  All forms of non-recourse revenue debt as well as debt approved by both the Legislature and a majority of the voters are also excluded from the limit.

**MVFT GO Bonds.**   MVFT GO bonds are exempt from the constitutional debt limit provided there are sufficient MVFT revenues to pay debt service. Mindful of the constitutional provision, legislative bond authorizations for MVFT GO bonds include a statutory commitment to continue to impose excise taxes on motor vehicle fuels in amounts sufficient to pay principal and interest.  The State Finance Committee's MVFT GO authorizing resolutions include this pledge and it is incorporated into the contractual obligation made by the State to investors. MVFT revenues currently represent approximately 60 percent of all state transportation revenues.
In 2015, the Legislature approved an 11.9-cent gas tax hike and certain license fees in the Connecting Washington package. The Legislature also authorized the issuance of $5.3 billion general obligation bonds for transportation projects backed by a new broader pledge of both motor vehicle fuel taxes and vehicle-related license fees. Issuance under the new pledge is not expected until FY 2019. Over the next few years, the ratio of revenues to debt service (the coverage ratio) will rise as the growth in MVFT revenues outpaces additional debt service. In 2019, coverage will rise further with the issuance of bonds pledging a broader range of revenues. Over time, the coverage ratio is expected to edge lower depending on the phasing of construction, the pace of bond funding and the cost of funds.

## figure 15 needs to be rendered

**Triple Pledge Bonds.**  Issuance of Triple Pledge bonds – paid from toll revenues, and backed by MVFT revenues and the general obligation pledge of the State – is constrained in two ways. First, these bonds are exempt from the Constitutional debt limit as they pledge MVFT revenues. MVFT revenues must be sufficient to pay triple pledge bond debt service. In addition, issuance of triple pledge bonds is constrained by contractual rate covenants and additional bonds tests determined by the ratio between net toll revenues on the SR 520 Corridor and maximum annual debt service.

**GARVEE Bonds.**  GARVEE bonds are exempt from the limit, but are constrained by a contractual additional bonds test. The State may not issue additional GARVEE bonds unless pledged federal transportation funds (or more specifically obligation authority) received during one of the two prior federal fiscal years are at least 3.5 times maximum annual debt service on outstanding GARVEE bonds.  The State Finance Committee has adopted a more restrictive policy - increasing this ratio to 3.75 – which ensures that most federal funds will remain available to support the State’s ongoing preservation and improvement program. No additional GARVEE issuance has been authorized. Technically, capacity is estimated to be approximately $350 million.

**Certificates of Participation.**     COPs are not subject to the constitutional debt limit as these obligations do not constitute debt as defined by the Constitution. Budgetary consideration is given to future annual appropriations necessary for each real estate or equipment financing. In addition, the State Finance Committee sets the maximum aggregate principal amount of outstanding financing contracts.
